Changelog for CityEngine 2026.0 (#89)
Esri/esri-cityengine-sdk: changelog.md

# CITYENGINE SDK 3.4.XXXXX CHANGELOG

This section lists changes compared to CityEngine SDK 3.3.11885.

## General Info
* CityEngine SDK 3.4.XXXXX is used in CityEngine 2026.0.XXXXX.

## PRT API

> * `prt::InitialShapeBuilder`: optimized performance and memory consumption for construction of large meshes with many faces.

Reviewer: use consistent captilazation after colon

## PRTX API
* `prtx::MeshBuilder`: 
  * Optimized memory consumption and performance. Especially sequential (face-after-face) mesh building is faster now.
  * Added batch setter functions `setFacesVertexIndices()`, `setFacesNormalIndices()`, `setFacesUVIndices()`, `setFacesMaterialIndices()` and `setFacesHoleIndices()` for even faster mesh construction.
* `prtx::Mesh::getUsedMem()`: Fixed a small bug (the `prtx::BoundingBox` was counted twice). 

> * `prtx::EncodePreparator::PreparationFlags::meshMerging()`: Fixed a bug where texture coordinates on other layers than 0 (colormap) were merged wrongly. For those layers, if there are no texture coordinates, a fallback to layer 0 happens if available (see "Texturing: Essential knowledge" in the CGA documentation). When meshes with and without texture coordinates on layer 0 were merged, these texture coordinates were sometimes wrongly set to (0,0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `prtx::EncodePreparator::PreparationFlags::meshMerging()`: Fixed a bug where texture coordinates on layers other than 0 (colormap) were merged incorrectly. For those layers, if no texture coordinates are present, the coordinates from layer 0 are used if available (see "Texturing: Essential knowledge" in the CGA documentation). When meshes with and without texture coordinates on layer 0 were merged, these texture coordinates were sometimes wrongly set to (0,0).
```

> * `prtx::StreamAdaptor::resolve()`: Changed exception thrown by underlying com.esri.prt.adaptors.FileSystemAdaptor for non-existing files from `std::invalid_argument` to `prtx::StatusException`. The new exception has its status set to `prt::STATUS_FILE_NOT_FOUND`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `prtx::StreamAdaptor::resolve()`: Changed exception thrown by underlying com.esri.prt.adaptors.FileSystemAdaptor for non-existent files from `std::invalid_argument` to `prtx::StatusException`. The new exception has its status set to `prt::STATUS_FILE_NOT_FOUND`.
```

## CGA
* Changes to existing features:

>   * inline keyword: Geometry tracking is now preserved when using inline(append) inside modify or inline(recompose), enabling reconnection of edited geometries if the inlined rule leads to a single leaf shape.

Reviewer 2: I find this sentence hard to understand:
All of the new functionality only works if there is only a single leaf shape inlined inside inline(append)?
If so, consider combining the two conditions ("when using inline(append)" and "if the inlined rule...") into one. E.g.
...when using inline(append) with a rule that yields a single leaf shape inside modify or inline(recompose)...

Also, consider replacing "inside" with "within".

* Bugfixes:
  * dynamic import feature:
      * The random number behaviour is now consistent with static imports. For example, changing unrelated code or overriding an attr does not lead to different random values.

>       * Fixed greying-out of unused attrs in the inspector.

Reviewer 2: Is it correct to mention the inspector here? It's a CityEngine concept.
(We never mentioned the inspector before I think.)

  * inline(unify), union, subtract, intersect operations:
    * Fixed unwanted collinear points in some cases.
    * Fixed a memory leak on self-unified shapes which could lead to a crash on exit.
  * modify operation: Fixed an out-of-memory error if shapes with uv coordinates were split recursively.
  * r operation: Fixed a bug where scopeCenter did not correctly preserve the scope center if scope.r was already non-zero.
 
## Built-In Codecs
* Collada, FBX, GLTF, OBJ, VUE encoders:
  * "meshGranularity" option: Fixed a bug where texture coordinates on other layers than 0 (colormap) were merged wrongly. In some cases (0,0) was taken instead of a fallback to the texture coordinate on layer 0.
* USD, Unreal encoders:
  * "meshMerging" option: Fixed a bug where texture coordinates on other layers than 0 (colormap) were merged wrongly. In some cases (0,0) was taken instead of a fallback to the texture coordinate on layer 0.

## Misc Changes and Fixes

> * RPKs with sizes > 2GB are supported now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* RPKs larger than 2GB are supported now.
```

> * Adaptor "com.esri.prt.adaptors.SevenZipStreamAdaptor" got renamed to "com.esri.prt.adaptors.RPKFileStreamAdaptor".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Adaptor "com.esri.prt.adaptors.SevenZipStreamAdaptor" was renamed to "com.esri.prt.adaptors.RPKFileStreamAdaptor".
```

# CITYENGINE SDK 3.3.11885 CHANGELOG

This section lists changes compared to CityEngine SDK 3.3.11669.

## General Info
* The focus of this release is to fix some issues which are important for certain client applications such as ArcGIS Pro. There is no CityEngine version using this version of the SDK.

## PRT API

> * `prt::Callbacks`: added function `cgaGetCoords()` for bulk conversion. The default implementation just calls `cgaGetCoord()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `prt::Callbacks`: added function `cgaGetCoords()` for bulk conversion. The default implementation just repeatedly calls `cgaGetCoord()`.
```

> * `prt::Callbacks`: added function `cgaGetCoords()` for bulk conversion. The default implementation just calls `cgaGetCoord()`.

Reviewer: use consistent captilazation after colon

## PRTX API

> * `prtx::MeshBuilder`: added functions `resetVertexCoords()`, `resetNormalCoords()`, `resetUVCoords()` and `resetFaces()`.

Reviewer: use consistent captilazation after colon

## CGA
* Bugfixes:
    * inline(unify), union, subtract, intersect operations: Improved robustness and fixed missing "bool.cut" auto tag on edges in rare cases.

## Built-In Codecs
* PNG decoder:
  * Improved multithreading performance.
* JPG decoder:
  * Fixed a regression where redundant jpgs were not detected by `prt::NonRedundantCache`.
  * Fixed a regression where single-channel textures had NODATA metadata value set on non-existing channels.
* CityGML codecs:
   * Updated to libcitygml 2.5.2.e5
* CityGML encoder:

>   * Reduced file size by reducing precision of uv coordinates to 4 digits after the point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Reduced file size by reducing precision of uv coordinates to 4 digits after the decimal point.
```

  * Reduced file size by optimizing internal identifiers.

>   * Fixed texture name in some cases (sometimes hex numbers were used instead of the real name).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Fixed name of texture files in some cases (sometimes hex numbers were used instead of the real name).
```
`texture name` could be misunderstood as being some reference within the file.

  * Fixed non-deterministic file size when re-encoding CityGML files.
  * Added the "convertVerticesTo" option which calls the `prt::Callbacks::cgaGetCoords()` function.
  * Fixed a bug where the XML tags could be in an invalid order.
* CityGML decoder:

>   * Fixed a bug where attributes were not UTF-8 encoded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Fixed a bug where text attributes were not read as UTF-8 strings.
```

  * Fixed a bug where all LOD levels were imported, leading to duplicate meshes and z-fighting. Now only the highest available LOD is imported.

>   * Made it independent of system locale.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Made number parsing independent of system locale.
```

Author: thanks. fixed directly on develop.

* Shapebuffer encoder:
  * Added the "convertVerticesTo" option which calls the `prt::Callbacks::cgaGetCoords()` function.
* IFC encoder:
  * Added options for vertex merging ("mergeVertices") and precision ("vertexPrecision").
* DWG encoder:
  * Added options for vertex merging ("mergeVertices") and precision ("vertexPrecision").
* TextureWithoutExtensionDecoder:
  * New decoder that reads textures that have no file extension (based on auto detection).

## Misc Changes and Fixes

> * Applied security updates for libxml (2.15.1), libjpeg-turbo (3.1.2), libpng (1.6.55), tbb(usd) (2021.10.0), libtiff (4.7.1), zlib (1.3.2).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Applied security updates for libxml2 (2.15.1), libjpeg-turbo (3.1.2), libpng (1.6.55), tbb(usd) (2021.10.0), libtiff (4.7.1), zlib (1.3.2).
```

* Windows: switched to MSVC 14.44.

> * Linux: switched to GCC 14.2.

Reviewer: use consistent captilazation after colon
